Draft: CK8S operating manual for AWS (#34)
elastisys/compliantkubernetes: docs/operator-manual/getting-started.md

2. Setup Terraform Cloud.

   Add your Terraform Cloud authentication token in the ` ~/.terraformrc` file. Please refer [Terraform Cloud](https://github.com/elastisys/ck8s-cluster/blob/master/README.md#terraform-cloud) section for further information. Please also check the the [requirements](https://github.com/elastisys/ck8s-cluster/blob/master/README.md#requirements) section for the specific Terraform version.

3. Generate PGP key.

  You need to generate GPG key as secrets in compliant kubernetes are are encrypted using [SOPS](https://github.com/mozilla/sops). To generate your own PGP key, run the command below:
  ```bash
  gpg --full-generate-key

  ```

4. Build CK8S-Cluster cli.

    We now have  all the prerequisites in place, it is time to build the cli for the compliant kubernetes cluster, `ck8s-cluster`. In order to build the ck8s-cluster cli please run  the following command:

    ```bash
    make build
    ```
    Once you build the cli, the built file can be found under `~/dist/` directory. Please rename the file to `ck8s`, as we will be using this name from this onward.

5. Upload and Register CK8S Base Image to AWS.

>   Upload the latest ck8s base image to AWS. You can find the latest base image in  [ck8s-base-vm](https://github.com/elastisys/ck8s-base-vm) repo. You can also build the base image by your self following the instructions [here](https://github.com/elastisys/ck8s-base-vm#building-the-image).

Reviewer: Should we make the images we have created already public?  Instead of requiring someone to build there own?  @tordsson @cristiklein

Reviewer 2: Yes, makes perfect sense to have the images public.

Reviewer: I left that meeting believing we were to use the cluster - and there was a quick chat on slack afterwards too.  I know I didn't take notes at the meet though and I'm guessing no one else did either.

7. Creating ck8s Cluster.

  We need to create two ck8s clusters:  service Cluster,`sc` and workload cluster, `wc`. Run the following commands to create the ck8s clusters:
  ```bash
  dist/ck8s apply --cluster sc
  dist/ck8s apply --cluster wc
  ```
  The cluster should now be up and running. You can verify this with:

  ```bash
  dist/ck8s status --cluster sc
  dist/ck8s status --cluster wc
  ```

## Compliant Kubernetes Applications' Configurations and Installations on AWS

Now the ck8s-cluster is up and runing, we are ready to install the compliant kubernetes apps.

Note that for some reason if your IP address changes, you need to add the new IP address in the whitelist under `~/.ck8s/aws/tfvars.json` file and run the following commands again.

```bash
dist/ck8s apply --cluster sc
dist/ck8s apply --cluster wc
```
Once the cluster is ready, please follow the following steps to install the compliant Kubernetes-apps. For more information about compliant kubernetes apps, please check the compliant kubernetes apps repo [here](https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-apps).

1. Clone the compliant kubernetes apps repo.

  ```bash

>   git clone https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-apps.git

Reviewer 3: `cd compliantkubernetes-apps`

  ```
2. Installation of prerequisite tools.

  To install the prerequisites please run the command below (assumes you are under `compliantkubernetes-apps` directory.). For more information please check the requirements section [here](https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-apps#requirements).

  ```bash
  ansible-playbook -e 'ansible_python_interpreter=/usr/bin/python3' --ask-become-pass --connection local --inventory 127.0.0.1, get-requirements.yaml
  ```

3. Initialization of Compliant Kubernetes apps.

    Run the following command to initialize the compliant kubernetes apps. Note that this will not overwrite existing values, but it will append to existing files.

    ```bash

>     ./bin/ck8s init

Reviewer 3: I get the following error here:

```
/home/cklein/blah/compliantkubernetes-apps/bin/init.bash: line 10: CK8S_CLOUD_PROVIDER: Missing CK8S_CLOUD_PROVIDER
```

Reviewer 3: And
```
/home/cklein/blah/compliantkubernetes-apps/bin/init.bash: line 11: CK8S_ENVIRONMENT_NAME: Missing CK8S_ENVIRONMENT_NAME
```

Reviewer 3: Any updates here?

    ```

>     Two more files, `sc-config.yaml` and `wc-config.yaml`, are generated in `~/.ck8s/aws/` directory.

Reviewer 3: Don't we need to set up DNS entries for `baseDomain` and `opsDomain`?

>     Edit the configuration files  `~/.ck8s/aws/sc-config.yaml`, `~/.ck8s/aws/wc-config.yaml` and `~/.ck8s/aws/secrets.yaml` and set the approriate values for some of the configuration fields, especially these fields whose values contain  `set-me`. Make sure also that the `objectStorage` values are set in `~/.ck8s/aws/sc-config.yaml`, `~/.ck8s/aws/wc-config.yaml` and `~/.ck8s/aws/secrets.yaml` according to your `objectStorage.type` (so `objectStorage.s3.*` if you are using s3 or `objectStorage.gcs.*` if you are using gcs.).

Reviewer: I think we should list each value that needs to be changed here

Author: > I think we should list each value that needs to be changed here

I also thought about listing them, however, it may confuse users if we put them together as they are in different places. Is there an optimal way to present them without while preserving their position in  the yaml structure?

Reviewer: maybe a table?
filename                key                          example value
secrets.yaml         s3.accessKey          <your key>

Reviewer 3: I agree with Geoff. Please focus on the minimum number of variables that need changing. Also, please capitalize S3 and GCS.

4. Installing Compliant Kubernetes apps.

    This step assumes the ck8s-cluster setup above is up and running. To install the sc and wc clusters run the following commands.

    ```bash

>     ./bin/ck8s apply sc

Reviewer 3: I get the following error here:
```
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/alertmanagerconfigs.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/alertmanagers.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/podmonitors.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/probes.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/prometheuses.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/prometheusrules.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/servicemonitors.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/thanosrulers.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
exit status 1
```

Reviewer 3: Any updates here?

>     ./bin/ck8s apply wc

Reviewer 3: I get the following message here:
```
[ck8s] Do you want to abort? (y/n): 
```
Can we document this limitation, to avoid surprising the operator.

Reviewer 3: And then I get the same error:
```
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/alertmanagerconfigs.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/alertmanagers.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/podmonitors.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/probes.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/prometheuses.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/prometheusrules.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/servicemonitors.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
unable to recognize "prometheus-operator/thanosrulers.yaml": no matches for kind "CustomResourceDefinition" in version "apiextensions.k8s.io/v1"
exit status 1
```

Reviewer: That error looks like its to do with the k8s version

Reviewer 3: Any updates here?

# Compliant Kubernetes Setup and Installations on AWS

This document describes how to set up Compliant Kubernetes on AWS. The setup has two major parts: Kubernetes cluster setup and Compliant Kubernetes applications setup. The following sections present the necessary steps to set up both parts.

##  Kubernetes Cluster set up

> In order to set up the kubernetes clusters, you need to clone the [Elastisys Compliant Kubernetes Kubespray](https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-kubespray.git)  repo first.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We suggest to set up Kubernetes clusters using kubespray. Clone the [Elastisys Compliant Kubernetes Kubespray](https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-kubespray.git) repo first.
```

```bash
git clone --recursive https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-kubespray.git
# cd to the cloned repo
cd compliantkubernetes-kubespray
```

> Once you download ck8s-cluster, please follow the steps below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> ### Infrastructure setup using terraform

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Infrastructure setup using Terraform
```

1. Setup Terraform Cloud.

   Add your Terraform Cloud authentication token in the ` ~/.terraformrc` file. Please refer [Terraform Cloud](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/terraform/cloud-sign-up#configure-access-for-the-terraform-cli) section for further information. Please also check the the [requirements](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubespray/tree/master/contrib/terraform/aws#kubernetes-on-aws-with-terraform) section for the specific Terraform version.

2. Update Terraform variables.

>   You need to set your Terraform credentials and update the default  AWS cluster values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    You need to set your Terraform credentials and update the default AWS cluster values.
```

>   1. Setting  Terraform credentials.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  3. Configure Terraform credentials.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    
```

    You can either export the variables for your AWS credentials or edit `kubespray/contrib/terraform/aws/credentials.tfvars`:

        ```bash
        cd kubespray/contrib/terraform/aws/
        cp credentials.tfvars.example credentials.tfvars
        export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<put your access-key>
        export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<put your secret-key>
        #please check the the link on how to create ssh key pair
        #https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-key-pairs.html
        export AWS_SSH_KEY_NAME=<An SSH key set up on AWS>
        export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION=<put your aws region-name>
        ```

>         Note: Pleased download the private key  when creating ssh key pair in AWS as it will be needed later.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        Note: Pleased download the private key when creating SSH key pair in AWS as it will be needed later.
```

>   2. Customize your infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  4. Customize your infrastructure.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    
```

>     Edit `terraform.tfvars` and change the values according to your requirements. Since we need to create two different clusters (service and workload), you should  set `aws_cluster_name` to  `sc` when creating service cluster and `wc` when creating workload cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Edit `terraform.tfvars` and change the values according to your requirements. Since we need to create two different clusters (service and workload), you should set `aws_cluster_name` to `sc` when creating service cluster and `wc` when creating workload cluster.
```

    Below is an example configuration.
      ```
      #Global Vars

>       aws_cluster_name = "sc|wc" #service cluster or workload cluster

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      aws_cluster_name = "sc|wc" # service cluster or workload cluster
```

      #VPC Vars
      aws_vpc_cidr_block       = "10.250.192.0/18"
      aws_cidr_subnets_private = ["10.250.192.0/20", "10.250.208.0/20"]
      aws_cidr_subnets_public  = ["10.250.224.0/20", "10.250.240.0/20"]

      #Bastion Host
      aws_bastion_size = "t2.medium"

      #Kubernetes Cluster

      aws_kube_master_num  = 3
      aws_kube_master_size = "t2.medium"

      aws_etcd_num  = 3
      aws_etcd_size = "t2.medium"

      aws_kube_worker_num  = 4
      aws_kube_worker_size = "t2.medium"

      #Settings AWS ELB

      aws_elb_api_port                = 6443
      k8s_secure_api_port             = 6443
      kube_insecure_apiserver_address = "0.0.0.0"

      default_tags = {
        #  Env = "devtest"
        #  Product = "kubernetes"
      }

>       inventory_file = "../../../inventory/hosts"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      inventory_file = "../../../inventory/hosts-sc|wc" # service cluster or workload cluster
```

      ```

>   3. initialize and apply terraform.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  5. Initialize and apply Terraform.
```

    Once you are done with Terraform configuration, it is now time to create the cluster two clusters.
    ```bash

>     terraform  init

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    terraform init
```

    terraform apply -state-out=<sc|wc state path>
  ```

>   Please make sure that you copy `../../../inventory/hosts` or use a different name before you create the second cluster. Otherwise, it will be overwritten. It  will be needed to deploy the kubernetes cluster later.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

It's better to have different names for the two hosts files. See above.

### Deploying sc|wc cluster with Kubespray.

> With the infrastructure provisioned, we can now deploy both the  sc and wc Kubernetes clusters using kubespray. Before trying any of the steps, make sure you are in the repo's root folder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the infrastructure provisioned, we can now deploy both the sc and wc Kubernetes clusters using kubespray. Before trying any of the steps, make sure you are in the repo's root folder.
```

1. Init the kubespray config in your config path.
  ```bash
  export CK8S_CONFIG_PATH=~/.ck8s/aws
  export CK8S_PGP_FP=<put your GPG-key here>
  #Use the AWS private key you downloaded above when you create SSH key pair.
  bin/ck8s-kubespray init sc default <AWS private-key>
  ```

  If you don't have a GPG key already, then you need to generate GPG key. This is because  secrets in Compliant Kubernetes are are encrypted using [SOPS](https://github.com/mozilla/sops). To generate your own PGP key, run the command below:
  ```bash
  gpg --full-generate-key
  ```
2. Copy the content of `../../../inventory/hosts` file (see step-3 under Terraform in case you use a different file) and paste it to `~/.ck8s/aws/inventory.ini`.

>    The following shows a sample content for `~/.ck8s/aws/inventory.ini`.

Reviewer 3: I'm confused here. Later we use `~/.ck8s/aws/<sc|wc>-config/inventory.ini`. How do those files make it there?

Author: This was a mistake... the third step should come first as these files are generated as a result of it :)

Author: I just realize that I forgot to add the initialization step :)

   ```bash
   [all]
    ip-10-250-203-132.us-west-1.compute.internal ansible_host=10.250.203.132
    ip-10-250-204-174.us-west-1.compute.internal ansible_host=10.250.204.174
    ip-10-250-209-206.us-west-1.compute.internal ansible_host=10.250.209.206
    ip-10-250-198-29.us-west-1.compute.internal ansible_host=10.250.198.29
    bastion ansible_host=3.101.23.107
    bastion ansible_host=3.101.61.191

    [bastion]
    bastion ansible_host=3.101.23.107
    bastion ansible_host=3.101.61.191

    [kube-master]
    ip-10-250-203-132.us-west-1.compute.internal

    [kube-node]
    ip-10-250-204-174.us-west-1.compute.internal
    ip-10-250-209-206.us-west-1.compute.internal

    [etcd]
    ip-10-250-198-29.us-west-1.compute.internal

    [k8s-cluster:children]
    kube-node
    kube-master
    etcd

    [k8s-cluster:vars]
    apiserver_loadbalancer_domain_name="kubernetes-elb-sc-569874712.us-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com"

    #don't forget to add the following as they won't be in the hosts file
    [all:vars]
    ansible_python_interpreter=/usr/bin/python3
    ansible_user=ubuntu
   ```
3. Run kubespray to set up the kubernetes cluster.
  ```

>   #please comment out lines with "---" in ~/.ck8s/aws/<sc|wc>-config/group_vars/all/all.yml and  ~/.ck8s/aws/<sc|wc>-config/group_vars/k8s-cluster/k8s-cluster.yml  as they may sometimes cause an error.

Reviewer 3: What error?

  ./bin/ck8s-kubespray apply <sc|wc>  --flush-cache
  ```
4. Done. You should now have a working kubernetes cluster. You should also have an encrypted kubeconfig at `~/.ck8s/aws/.state/kube_config_<sc|wc>.yaml` that you can use to access the cluster.

5. Accessing the clusters.

>  Please copy the content of your  kubeconfig and save it, for example, in your working directory

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 Please copy the content of your kubeconfig and save it, for example, in your working directory
```

 sops ~/.ck8s/aws/.state/kube_config_<sc|wc>.yaml

 #paste the copied content and save it in your working directory
 #please copy the URL of the load balancer from inventory file
 #(i.e., ~/.ck8s/aws/<sc|wc>-config/inventory.ini) and
 #paste this URL into the server parameter in kubectl config. Do not overwrite the port.
 vi  <sc|wc>.yaml

 #accessing the cluster
 kubectl --kubconfig <sc|wc>.yaml get nodes
 ```
 The following snippet shows an example kubeconfig.
  ```
  apiVersion: v1
  clusters:
  -   cluster:
          certificate-authority-data: xxx
          server: https://kubernetes-elb-sc-569874712.us-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com:6443
      name: cluster.local
  contexts:
  -   context:
          cluster: cluster.local
          user: kubernetes-admin-cluster.local
      name: kubernetes-admin-cluster.local@cluster.local
  current-context: kubernetes-admin-cluster.local@cluster.local
  kind: Config
  preferences: {}
  users:
  -   name: kubernetes-admin-cluster.local
      user:
          client-certificate-data: xxx
          client-key-data: xxx
  ```

## Compliant Kubernetes Applications' Configurations and Installations on AWS

> Now the kubernetes clusters are up and running, we are ready to install the compliant kubernetes apps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that the Kubernetes clusters are up and running, we are ready to install the Compliant Kubernetes applications.
```

> Once the cluster is ready, please follow the instructions below to install the compliant Kubernetes-apps. For more information about compliant kubernetes apps, please check the compliant kubernetes apps repo [here](https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-apps).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the clusters are ready, please follow the instructions below to install the Compliant Kubernetes applications. For more information, please check the Compliant Kubernetes repo [here](https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-apps).
```

> 1. Clone the compliant kubernetes apps repo.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Clone the Compliant Kubernetes apps repo.
```

  ```bash
  git clone https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-apps.git
  ```
2. Installation of prerequisite tools.

  To install the prerequisites please run the command below (assumes you are under `compliantkubernetes-apps` directory.). For more information please check the requirements section [here](https://github.com/elastisys/compliantkubernetes-apps#requirements).

  ```bash
  ansible-playbook -e 'ansible_python_interpreter=/usr/bin/python3' --ask-become-pass --connection local --inventory 127.0.0.1, get-requirements.yaml
  ```
3. Prepare all the required domains.
  You will need to set up the following DNS entries (replace example.com with your domain).

>   Point these domains to the workload cluster ingress controller:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Point these domains to the workload cluster load balancer fronting the Ingress controller:
```

  `*.example.com`

  `prometheus.ops.example.com`

  Point these domains to the service cluster ingress controller:

  `*.ops.example.com`

  `grafana.example.com`

  `harbor.example.com`

  `kibana.example.com`

  `dex.example.com`

  `notary.harbor.example.com`

> 

Reviewer 3: Please fix the formatting above to make it more compact. A single multi-line code block will do.

5. Edit the kubeconfig files
 Two encrypted kubeconfig files were created when the  two kubernetes clusters(i.e, sc, wc) were created  above. The two files are  `~/.ck8s/aws/.state/kube_config_sc.yaml` for  `sc` cluster and `~/.ck8s/aws/.state/kube_config_wc.yaml` for `wc` cluster.  

  Please copy the URL of the load balancer from inventory file
 (i.e., ~/.ck8s/aws/<sc|wc>-config/inventory.ini) and

>  paste this URL into the server parameter in kubeconfig. Do not overwrite the port (see the example presented above).

Reviewer 3: I don't get the steps above. Hasn't the user already done this?

Author: The apps deployment script (i.e., `./bin/ck8s apply sc|wc`) uses the kubeconfigs located in `CK8S_CONFIG_PATH`. Thus, we need to change the value of the `server` parameter to point to the load balancer for each cluster.

6. Initialization of Compliant Kubernetes apps.

>     Run the following command to initialize the compliant kubernetes apps. Note that this will not overwrite existing values, but it will append to existing files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Run the following command to initialize the Compliant Kubernetes apps. Note that this will not overwrite existing values, but it will append to existing files.
```

        s3:
          region: "set-me" #put the region, e.g, west-1
          regionAddress: "set-me" #put the region address, e.g, s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com
          regionEndpoint: "set-me"#put the region endpoint, e.g., https://s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com

      fluentd:
       useRegionEndpoint: "set-me" # set it to either true or false
       ```
   2. Changes in `~/.ck8s/aws/sc-config.yaml`:

     ```
     global:
      baseDomain: "set-me" #based on the above domain example this is set to example.com
      opsDomain: "set-me" #based on the above domain example this is set to ops.example.com

    objectStorage:
      type: "s3" # assumes that you are using s3
      s3:
        region: "set-me" #put the region, e.g, west-1
        regionAddress: "set-me" #put the region address, e.g, s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com
        regionEndpoint: "set-me" #put the region endpoint, e.g., https://s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com
     ```
   3. Changes in `~/.ck8s/aws/secrets.yaml`:

   ```
   objectStorage:
    s3:
        accessKey: "set-me" #put your s3 accesskey
        secretKey: "set-me" #put your s3 secretKey
   ```

6. Installing Compliant Kubernetes apps.

>     This step assumes the ck8s-cluster setup above is up and running. To install the sc and wc clusters run the following commands.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Run the following commands:
```
